


[pg!i]




                                  The

                           Project Gutenberg

                               RST Manual




[pg!iii]




Contents


    Installing EpubMaker
      Windows
      Debian
    PG-RST Classes
      Classes For Inline Text
      Classes For Block Text
      Classes For Front Matter Markup
    PG-RST Extensions
      Styles
      Pagination
      Table of Contents
      List of Figures
      List of Tables
      Toc-Entry
      Footnotes
      Page Numbers
      Dropcaps
      Tables
    PG Metadata
      Top Boilerplate
      Metadata Directive
      Bottom Boilerplate
    PG-RST Best Practices
    Examples and Tests
      Section 3.1
      Section 3.2
      Section 3.3

[pg!v]




List of Tables


    Classes For Inline Text I
    Classes For Inline Text II
    Classes For Inline Text III
    Classes For Block Text
    Classes For Front Matter Markup
    Directives For Pagination
    Footnote Positions
    Support for dropcaps in output formats
    Demo Table
    Truth table for “and”
    Fields In the PG Scheme
    Fields In the DC Scheme
    Fields In the MARCREL Scheme
    Fields Without Scheme
    _TABLE 8_ Types of Computers Used in the Systems Reported

[pg!vii]




List of Figures


    Richard and Drucilla Martin

[pg!1]




Installing EpubMaker


EpubMaker is Project Gutenberg’s file converter. It can convert from
PG-RST to HTML, EPUB, PDF and plain text.



Windows


Prerequisites


  1. Install Python.

     Assuming you don’t have python yet. If you have either version 2.6
     or 2.7 already installed, skip this.

     From http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.7/ download the
     Windows x86 MSI Installer (2.7) and run it.

     Select all the default options and install.

  2. Install Python Setuptools.

     From http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools download
     setuptools-0.6c11.win32-py2.7.exe (or any newer version) and run
     it.

     If you are using python 2.6 get the setuptools for 2.6.

  3. Install Groff. (You can skip this step if you don’t want to
     generate plain text files.)

     From http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/groff.htm download
     _Complete package, except sources - Setup_ (groff-1.20.1-setup.exe)
     and run it.

     Select all the default options and install.

  4. Install TexLive. (You can skip this step if you don’t want to
     generate PDF files.)

     Go to http://mirror.ctan.org/systems/texlive/tlnet and download the
     file install-tl.zip. Then say:

         > unzip install−tl.zip
         > cd install−tl*
         > install−tl

     This will open the TeX Live installation wizard. Follow the
     instructions. When in doubt use the defaults.

     This will take quite a while. (3 hours on an old Dell Vostro 1000
     laptop. It installs about 2.5 GB in 93,000 files.) If you
     experience download problems, restart the wizard: it will resume
     the download where it left off.

     Long installation instructions can be found at
     http://www.tug.org/texlive/doc/texlive-en/texlive-en.html#x1-150003

  5. Install HTML Tidy. (You can skip this step if you only want to
     process RST files and don’t want to build EPUBs from HTML input.)

     If you are a post-processor you already have this.

     http://tidy.sourceforge.net/

  6. Update your PATH.

     Start | Control Panel | System | Advanced | Environment Variables.
     Click "Path" in the User variables at the top. Click "Edit"

     If the field is empty just enter (all in one line):

         C:\Python27;
         C:\Python27\Scripts;
         C:\Program Files\GnuWin32\bin;

     If the field contains data, go to the end of that data and add a
     semicolon if there isn’t one already and then add the string above.

     Click Ok three times.



EpubMaker


  1. At the command prompt run:

         > easy_install epubmaker

  2. Test your installation:

         > epubmaker −−help
         > epubmaker http://www.gutenberg.org/masters/rst/181/181.rst




Debian


Prerequisites


(Does not work with python 3 yet. If your distribution uses python 3 as
default (not likely!), you’ll have to parallel install python 2.6 or
2.7.)

    # apt−get install python python−setuptools python−lxml
    # apt−get install groff tidy
    # apt−get install libpng−dev libjpeg−dev libfreetype6−dev

Note: To get PDF generation to work, you have to use TeX Live version
2009-11 or newer. You can get those from debian testing or unstable. If
don’t want to switch from debian stable, you have to install TeX Live
manually.

If you are on testing or unstable:

    # apt−get install texlive texlive−latex−extra texlive−xetex
    # apt−get install ttf−linux−libertine ttf−dejavu

Else, to install TeX Live manually, go to
http://mirror.ctan.org/systems/texlive/tlnet and download the file
install-tl-unx.tar.gz. Unpack it. Then:

    # cd /path/where/unpacked
    # perl install−tl −gui

Long installation instructions can be found at
http://www.tug.org/texlive/doc/texlive-en/texlive-en.html#x1-150003


EpubMaker


    # easy_install epubmaker


Kindlegen


(Optional: Used only to make Kindle files):

    $ wget http://s3.amazonaws.com/kindlegen/kindlegen_linux_2.6_i386_v1.2.tar.gz
    $ tar −xzf kindlegen_linux_2.6_i386_v1.2.tar.gz




PG-RST Classes


A list of classes you can use in PG-RST.



Classes For Inline Text


These classes have an effect on inline text. If you put them on a block,
all inline contents of the block will be rendered accordingly.


Classes For Inline Text I

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Class         Explanation
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            italics       Switch to italic font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            bold          Switch to boldface.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            small-caps    Switch to small capitals.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            gesperrt      Switch to gesperrt (extended
                          letter spacing).
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            antiqua       Switch to antiqua.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            monospaced    Switch to monospaced font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────


Classes For Inline Text II

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Class         Explanation
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            smaller       Switch to smaller font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            larger        Switch to larger font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            xx-small      Switch to smallest font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            x-small       Switch to very small font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            small         Switch to small font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            medium        Switch to normal font size.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            large         Switch to large font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            x-large       Switch to very large font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            xx-large      Switch to largest font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────


Classes For Inline Text III

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Class         Explanation
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            red           Switch to red font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            green         Switch to green font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            blue          Switch to blue font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            yellow        Switch to yellow font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            white         Switch to white font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            gray          Switch to gray font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            black         Switch to black font.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────



Classes For Block Text


These classes have an effect on block text. Please do not confuse the
alignment of the block with the alignment of the text in the block. Eg.
a table can be centered, while the text inside the table is
left-aligned. The alignment of the block is set with the align option.


Classes For Block Text

        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        Class                  Explanation
        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        left                   Left-aligns the text in the
                               block.
        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        center                 Centers the text in the block.
        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        right                  Right-aligns the text in the
                               block.
        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        justify                Justifies the text in the block.
        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        white-space-pre-line   Preserves newlines.
        ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



Classes For Front Matter Markup


EpubMaker includes a few classes to markup front matter. While it is not
necessary to do this, it adds value. In future the PG catalog might
automatically extract not only the cover page but also the title page,
verso, etc.


Classes For Front Matter Markup

            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Class          Explanation
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            coverpage      The cover page.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            frontispiece   The frontispiece.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            titlepage      The title page.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            verso          The title page verso.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            dedication     The dedication page.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            plainpage      A general class for page.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────


Use these classes on a container. These classes already insert page
breaks before the container so you need not insert page breaks on your
own.




    .. container:: titlepage

       | Pride and Prejudice
       |
       | Written by Jane Austen.




PG-RST Extensions


You can create custom roles based on the existing ones. This is how you
create and then use custom roles.




    .. role:: small−caps
       :class: small−caps

    This text is in :small−caps:`Small Caps`.

This text is in _Small Caps_.




You can attach more than one class to a role:




    .. role:: big−and−bold
       :class: x−large bold

    This text is :big−and−bold:`big and bold`.

This text is *big and bold*.




Styles


You can redefine the rendering of elements:




    .. style:: emphasis
       :class: gesperrt

    Now *emphasis* will be rendered as gesperrt.

Now emphasis__ will be rendered as gesperrt.




    .. style:: strong
       :class: small−caps

    And **Strong Emphasis** will be rendered as small−caps.

And *_Strong Emphasis_* will be rendered as small-caps.




    .. style:: strong
       :class: small−caps x−large bold

    And **Strong Emphasis** will be rendered as big bold small−caps.

And *_Strong Emphasis_* will be rendered as big bold small-caps.




    .. style:: literal
       :class: red

    ``literally red``

    .. style:: superscript
       :class: green

    :superscript:`sup`\ er

    .. style:: title_reference
       :class: blue

    :title−reference:`Hamlet` and `Othello`.

literally red

super

_Hamlet_ and _Othello_.




You can semantically markup foreign text:




    .. role:: french
       :class: language−fr italics

    :french:`Pas de double` is the French for "father of twins".

_Pas de double_ is the French for "father of twins".




Pagination


Pagination is important if you generate PDFs. See the Directives For
Pagination Table.


Directives For Pagination

    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    Directive         Explanation
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    clearpage         This directive inserts a page break.
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    cleardoublepage   This directive inserts page breaks so that the
                      next item starts on a right-hand page.
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    vfill             (PDF only.)

                      This directive generates ‘elastic´ vertical
                      space. This space expands to all of the free
                      space on one page. If you use this more than
                      once on a page, the free space is equally
                      divided among all invocations.

                      To vertically align an item to the bottom, use
                      vfill before that item.

                      To vertically align an item about 1/3 of the
                      page use vfill once before the item and twice
                      after the item.
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    frontmatter       (PDF only.)

                      Put this directive at the start of your book.

                      The pgheader directive uses this directive
                      internally, so you can omit frontmatter
                      whenever you use pgheader.

                      This directive turns on roman page numbers.
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    mainmatter        (PDF only.)

                      Put this directive after the table of contents
                      and before the first chapter.

                      This directive switches from roman page
                      numbering to arabic page numbering and resets
                      the page counter.
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    backmatter        (PDF only.)

                      Put this directive before appendices or
                      indices.
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



Table of Contents


Use the RST contents directive to automatically generate a table of
contents.

N.B. You may also provide a table of contents manually.

In PG-RST the contents directive requires you to specify an argument or
the local option.

The local option displays a local table of contents, containing only the
sub-sections of the section in which it is declared.

The page-numbers option displays the original page number in the TOC.




    .. contents:: A TOC With Page Numbers
       :depth: 2
       :page−numbers:




A TOC With Page Numbers


    Installing EpubMaker ..............................................
      Windows .........................................................
      Debian ..........................................................
    PG-RST Classes ....................................................
      Classes For Inline Text .........................................
      Classes For Block Text ..........................................
      Classes For Front Matter Markup .................................
    PG-RST Extensions .................................................
      Styles ..........................................................
      Pagination ......................................................
      Table of Contents ...............................................
      List of Figures .................................................
      List of Tables ..................................................
      Toc-Entry .......................................................
      Footnotes .......................................................
      Page Numbers ....................................................
      Dropcaps ........................................................
      Tables ..........................................................
    PG Metadata .......................................................
      Top Boilerplate .................................................
      Metadata Directive ..............................................
      Bottom Boilerplate ..............................................
    PG-RST Best Practices .............................................
    Examples and Tests ................................................
      Section 3.1 .....................................................
      Section 3.2 .....................................................
      Section 3.3 .....................................................



List of Figures


Use the lof directive to generate a list of figures automatically.

N.B. You may also provide a list of figures manually.




    .. lof:: A List of Figures
       :page−numbers:
       :backlinks: none


A List of Figures


    Richard and Drucilla Martin .......................................




List of Tables


Use the lot directive to generate a list of tables.

N.B. You may also provide a list of tables manually.




    .. lot:: A List of Tables
       :page−numbers:
       :backlinks: none


A List of Tables


    Classes For Inline Text I .........................................
    Classes For Inline Text II ........................................
    Classes For Inline Text III .......................................
    Classes For Block Text ............................................
    Classes For Front Matter Markup ...................................
    Directives For Pagination .........................................
    Footnote Positions ................................................
    Support for dropcaps in output formats ............................
    Demo Table ........................................................
    Truth table for “and” .............................................
    Fields In the PG Scheme ...........................................
    Fields In the DC Scheme ...........................................
    Fields In the MARCREL Scheme ......................................
    Fields Without Scheme .............................................
    _TABLE 8_ Types of Computers Used in the Systems Reported .........




Toc-Entry


Use the toc-entry directive to:

  - provide an alternate toc entry
  - suppress a toc entry, or
  - switch toc gathering on or off.

A toc-entry with argument sets the argument as toc entry for the next
section, figure or table.

A toc-entry without argument suppresses the toc entry for the next
section, figure or table.

Use the depth option to set the depth up to which section titles are
gathered for the toc. A depth of 0 switches toc gathering off.




    .. toc−entry:: An Alternative Caption




Footnotes


Always define footnotes right after the paragraph they are referenced.


Positioning of footnotes

            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Format      Position
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            HTML        Collected under the footnotes
                        directive.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            EPUB        Idem.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            TXT         Where they are defined.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PDF         At the bottom of the current page.
            ─────────────────────────────────────────────────


To collect the footnotes use the footnotes directive. This directive
will output a section with title and all footnotes in the document will
be moved inside the section.

In PDF and TXT formats the footnotes directive will do nothing.¹

Test²³ .

    ¹ Not even print the section title.




    .. footnotes:: Footnotes
       :class: smaller




    ² Another footnote, to test how multiple footnotes⁴ stack on one
      page.

    ³ Later editions continued as follows:

      When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
      And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
      But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
      His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.

    ⁴ Gibbon test. A footnote inside a footnote.



Page Numbers


The sequence [pg n] will convert into a page number marker of n. n can
be any arabic or roman numeral. The sequence itself will be removed from
the text flow leaving a page anchor. There _must_ be spaces around the
sequence. If the page break is in the middle of a word, join the word
and put the sequence at the end of the word.




    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
    nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt [pg 42] ut labore et dolore magna
    aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo
    duo dolores [pg xviii] et ea rebum.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy
eirmod tempor invidunt [pg 42] ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores [pg
xviii] et ea rebum.




A reference to a page number can be inserted with the sequence [pg n]_.
This will generate a link to the page anchor.




    See page [pg 42]_.

See page [pg 42]_.




An invisible page number can be inserted with the sequence [pg!n].




    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
    nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt [pg!43] ut labore et dolore magna
    aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo
    duo dolores et ea rebum. See page [pg 43]_.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy
eirmod tempor invidunt [pg!43] ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. See page [pg 43]_.




See page [pg iii]_.



Dropcaps


You can insert dropcaps with the dropcap directive. You can use either
an enlarged character or an image as dropcap. You can also specify a
span of character that should be set in small-caps after the dropcap
initial.


Support for dropcaps in output formats

          ────────────────────────────────────────────────────
          Format    Letter                Image
          ────────────────────────────────────────────────────
          HTML      enlarged and          resized and dropped
                    dropped
          ────────────────────────────────────────────────────
          EPUB      enlarged on           resized on baseline
                    baseline
          ────────────────────────────────────────────────────
          TXT       normal size           alt text
          ────────────────────────────────────────────────────
          PDF       enlarged and          resized and
                    dropped⁵              dropped⁵
          ────────────────────────────────────────────────────


    ⁵ _Warning:_ If a paragraph with a dropcap gets page-broken the
      dropcap may stick into the page bottom. Avoid dropcaps unless you
      are sure that you are at the top of a page, like at a chapter
      start.

The first argument (mandatory) states the character(s) to replace with
caps. It must match the beginning of the next paragraph.

The second (optional) argument states the characters to replace with
small-caps. It must also match the beginning of the next paragraph.




    .. clearpage::

    .. dropcap:: L Lorem ipsum
       :lines: 4
       :indents: −1.25em 0.5em

    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
    nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam
    erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo
    dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata
    sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet,
    consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt
    ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua.




L_orem ipsum_ dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem
ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing
elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna
aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua.




The lines option (PDF only) specifies how many lines the dropcap should
span. Default is 2.

The indents option (PDF only) can specifiy up to 2 length values. The
first one is the indent of the first line, the second one the indent of
the following lines. The indent is calculated from the right border of
the dropcap letter. Defaults are 0em and 0.5em.

The image option specifies the image url. In plain text and EPUB the
image will not be used.




    .. clearpage::

    .. dropcap:: G
       :image: images/G.png
       :lines: 4

    Gorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
    nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam
    erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo
    dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata
    sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet,
    consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt
    ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua.




__orem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem
ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing
elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna
aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua.




Tables


Be careful with tables because the table support of many ereaders is
weak or nil.

Tables also support these options:

width  Makes the table that wide.

widths A space-separated list of unitless values, each specifying the
       relative width of one table column.

       If you don’t use the option widths, the column widths are
       calculated from the layout of the table in your source file.

aligns Horizontally align the columns.

       A space-separated list of alignments, each specifying the
       alignment of one column.

       Valid alignments values are: left, center, right and justify.

vertical-aligns
       Vertically align the columns.

       A space-separated list of vertical alignments, each specifying
       the alignment of one column.

       Valid alignments values are: top, middle, and bottom.

       Note: vertical alignment is fully supported in HTML only. Other
       formats may support it in varying degrees.

summary (HTML only.)
       Puts a summary attribute on the table element.

These are the extra classes supported by PG-RST:

norules
       Omits the rules between table rows. (Not the rule between header
       and body nor the rules at the top and bottom of the table.)

       Use this class when the eye can follow the table rows without the
       aid of rules.




    .. table:: Demo Table
       :width: 100%
       :align: center
       :widths: 3 1 1 1
       :aligns: justify justify center right
       :vertical−aligns: top middle bottom top
       :summary: This table contains valuable data.

       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+
       | Header row, column 1   | Justified | Centered | Price ($) |
       | (header rows optional) |           |          |           |
       +========================+===========+==========+===========+
       | row 1                  | column    |  column  |      1.23 |
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+
       | row 2                  | col col   |   col    |     45.67 |
       |                        | col col   |          |           |
       |                        | col col   |          |           |
       |                        | col       |          |           |
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+
       | row 3                  | Cells may span columns.          |
       |                        | Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet,      |
       |                        | consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed |
       |                        | nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut |
       |                        | labore et dolore magna aliquyam  |
       |                        | sed diam voluptua. At vero eos   |
       |                        | accusam et justo duo dolores et  |
       |                        | rebum.                           |
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+
       | Cells may span rows and            | Cells    | row 4     |
       | columns. Lorem ipsum dolor sit     | may span +−−−−−−−−−−−+
       | amet, consetetur adipiscing.       | rows.    | row 5     |
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−+−−−−−−−−−−−+


Demo Table

   ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   Header row, column 1 (header    Justified   Centered    Price ($)
   rows optional)
   ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   row 1                           column       column          1.23
   ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   row 2                           col col        col          45.67
                                   col col
                                   col col
                                   col
   ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   row 3                           Cells may span columns. Lorem
                                   ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur
                                   sadipscing elitr, sed nonumy
                                   eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore
                                   et dolore magna aliquyam sed diam
                                   voluptua. At vero eos accusam et
                                   justo duo dolores et rebum.
   ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   Cells may span rows and columns. Lorem      Cells may       row 4
   ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur            span      ────────────
   adipiscing.                                 rows.           row 5
   ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────




    .. table:: Truth table for “and”
       :class: norules
       :align: center
       :width: 50%

       ===== ===== =========
         A     B    A and B
       ===== ===== =========
       False False False
       True  False False
       False True  False
       True  True  True
       ===== ===== =========


Truth table for “and”

                    ─────────────────────────────────
                    A         B         A and B
                    ─────────────────────────────────
                    False     False     False
                    ─────────────────────────────────
                    True      False     False
                    ─────────────────────────────────
                    False     True      False
                    ─────────────────────────────────
                    True      True      True
                    ─────────────────────────────────




PG Metadata



Top Boilerplate


This section explains the PG boilerplate that you must put at the top of
your PG-RST file.

It looks like this:




     .. −*− encoding: utf−8 −*−      (1)

     .. meta::                       (2)
        :PG.Id: 181
        :PG.Title: Very Short Title
        :PG.Released: 2010−11−25
        :PG.Rights: Public Domain
        :PG.Producer: Woody Guthrie
        :PG.Producer: Pete Seeger
        :PG.Producer: The Almanac Singers
        :PG.Credits: This file was produced from images stolen from the Louvre.
        :DC.Creator: Jane Austen
        :MARCREL.edt: Mark Twain
        :MARCREL.ill: Édouard Manet
        :DC.Title: Full Title Statement
        :DC.Language: en
        :DC.Language: fr
        :DC.Language: de
        :DC.Created: 1900
        :coverpage: images/cover.jpg


     ===========
     Short Title                     (3)
     ===========

     .. pgheader::                   (4)




  (1) Insert this line verbatim. It must be the first line in the text.⁶
      This tells the converter to use UTF-8 encoding and is also
      recognized by many editors.
  (2) The metadata directive: see section below.
  (3) This will be the first line of the generated files. It should say:
      “The Project Gutenberg Ebook of Title” or just “Title”. Use ’=’
      above and below the title.
  (4) This directive inserts the PG header as generated from the
      metadata.

    ⁶ A unicode BOM is allowed before this. In fact most Windows editors
      will add a BOM without asking you.



Metadata Directive


The metadata directive contains all data that is used to generate the PG
header and the PG catalog entry.

The scheme is the part before the dot.


PG Scheme


The PG scheme holds data that is relevant to Project Gutenberg only.


Fields In the PG Scheme

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Name          Contents
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PG.Id         The ebook number.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PG.Released   The PG release date in YYYY-MM-DD
                          format.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PG.Rights     Either ’Public Domain’ or
                          ’Copyrighted’.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PG.Title      A much shortened form of the
                          title. Used in the PG boilerplate
                          in the lines that say: “Start of
                          this PG ebook …” and “End of this
                          PG ebook …”.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PG.Producer   A personal name or organization
                          that helped produce this text.
                          This field may appear more than
                          once. Don’t put more than one
                          name into one field. Repeat the
                          field if necessary.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            PG.Credits    A line acknowledging the source
                          of the images or other stuff.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────


DC Scheme


This scheme holds standard Dublincore stuff and is used by many search
engines and the PG cataloguing software.


Fields In the DC Scheme

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Name          Contents
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            DC.Creator    Author. A personal name or
                          organization that created the
                          text. May appear more than once.
                          Don’t put more than one name into
                          one field. Repeat the field if
                          necessary.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            DC.Title      The full title statement as found
                          on the book’s title page.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            DC.Language   The 2 or 3 letter code for all
                          languages used for substantial
                          portions of the text. May appear
                          more than once. Don’t put more
                          than one code into one field.
                          Repeat the field if necessary.
                          The languages listed here are
                          indicative for the catalog and do
                          not set the text language and
                          hyphenation rules. Use the option
                          class language-<language-code>
                          for that.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            DC.Created    The year of original publication
                          if known.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────


MARCREL Scheme


This is used to record contributors to the text. All these fields may
appear more than once. Don’t put more than one name into one field.
Repeat the field if necessary.


Fields In the MARCREL Scheme

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Name          Contents
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            MARCREL.edt   Editor
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            MARCREL.ill   Illustrator
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            MARCREL.trl   Translator
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            MARCREL.*     See the full list of MARC relator
                          codes.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────


No Scheme


Some fields are associated with none of the above schemes.


Fields Without Scheme

            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            Name          Contents
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────
            coverpage     A coverpage for those formats
                          (eg. Kindle) that support a cover
                          page. This image must be included
                          in the upload but must not
                          necessarily be put in the text
                          flow.
            ────────────────────────────────────────────────



Bottom Boilerplate


You must put this at the very bottom of your PG-RST file.




     .. pgfooter::     (1)




  (1) This directive inserts the PG footer and license.




PG-RST Best Practices


Images


Specify a width option in images and a figwidth option in figures and
express it in percent.

If you don’t specify a width, the converter will calculate the width
percentile for you, using the formula:

    image_width / (980px * 0.8) * 100

(980px is the approx. wide of a browser window with scrollbar on a
1024px wide screen, 0.8 are 10% margins left and right.)

Expressing the image size relative to the screen width is the best way
to get images right on a wide variety of devices form iPhones to print.




    .. toc−entry:: Richard and Drucilla Martin

    .. figure:: images/cover.jpg
       :align: center
       :alt: Richard and Drucilla Martin

       :lb:`Richard Martin was a slave in Memphis, Tennessee.
       Drucilla Martin was a slave in Giles County, Tennessee.`

       The legend consists of all elements after the caption.  Lorem
       ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
       nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam
       erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo
       dolores et ea rebum.

[Illustration: Richard Martin was a slave in Memphis, Tennessee.
Drucilla Martin was a slave in Giles County, Tennessee.]

The legend consists of all elements after the caption.  Lorem ipsum
dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod
tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam
voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea rebum.




[pg!2]




Tests and Examples




Notice


The rest of this file contains tests. You may look at the RST source to
learn how things are done.




A generated local table of contents:

    Section 3.1
    Section 3.2
    Section 3.3

A local table of contents as highlights:

    Kingston — Instructive remarks on early English history —
    Instructive observations on carved oak and life in general — Sad
    case of Stivvings, junior — Musings on antiquity — I forget that
    I am steering — Interesting result — Hampton Court Maze — Harris
    as a guide.


ÄÖÜ äöüß Æsop Œdipus cœr. Đ. †‡ ｳ. §2.1

‘’ ‚‛ “ ” ‹› em — en –.

“ ‘Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem
ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing
elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna
aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo
dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus
est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.’ ”

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy
eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam
voluptua. [pg 3] At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem
ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing
elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna
aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo
dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus
est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.

                                  ――――

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy
eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam
voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea rebum. Stet
clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit
amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem
ipsum dolor sit amet.

[pg 4]

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy
eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam
voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea rebum. Stet
clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit
amet. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat,
sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea
rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem
ipsum dolor sit amet.

  ‘Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
  He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.’

        CHORUS.

(In which the cook and the baby joined):—

      ‘Wow! wow! wow!’

Summer wanes, the children are grown;
  Fun and frolic no more he knows;
Robert of Lincoln’s a humdrum crone;
  Off he flies and we sing as he goes:
    Bob-o’link, bob-o’-link,
    Spink, spank, spink;
When you can pipe that merry old strain,
Robert of Lincoln, come back again.
      Chee, chee, chee.

And now a quote by Lorem Ipsum:

    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed
    diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna
    aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et
    justo duo dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita [pg 5] kasd gubergren,
    no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet. Lorem
    ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam
    nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam
    erat, sed diam voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo
    dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren, no sea takimata
    sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.

    ―― Lorem Ipsum

[pg 7]



Section 3.1


    I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba, and say
    “’Tis all barren;” and so is all the world to him who will not
    cultivate the fruits it offers.

    ―― Sterne: Sentimental Journey.


Simple List with hyphens

  - Wash left ear.
  - Wash right ear.
  - Brush teeth.

Simple List with bullets

  · Wash left ear.
  · Wash right ear.
  · Brush teeth.

Nested List

  1. Item 1.
     a) Item 1a.
     b) Item 1b.
            I) Item 1.a.I
           II) Item 1.a.II
          III) Item 1.a.III
           IV) Item 1.a.IV
  2. A)     i) Item 2.A.i [pg 8]
           ii) Item 2.A.ii
     B)     i) Item 2.B.i
           ii) Item 2.B.ii
          iii) Item 2.B.iii
     C) Item 2.C
  3. Item 3.

Definition List

term   Definition.

term 2 Definition 2

       Definition 2 paragraph 2.

long term 3
       Definition 3

Option List (not used by PG)

-a
,      command-line option "a"
-1
 [4m_file_[0m
,
--one
=[4m_file_[0m
,
--two
 [4m_file_[0m
,      Multiple options with arguments.

[pg 123]



Section 3.2⁷


    ⁷ This title contains a footnote reference. The footnote reference
      will not show up in the TOC.

Some text so this section isn’t empty.



Section 3.3


THE MAN WHO PLEASES.


    _The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,_
    _The best-conditioned and unwearied spirit_
    _In doing courtesies._

    _―― Merchant of Venice._


    _He hath a daily beauty in his life._

    _―― Othello._


    _Such a man would win any woman in the world_
    _if a’ could get her good will._

    _―― Much Ado About Nothing._


There are few subjects of deeper interest to men and women than that of
personal fascination,

    «Ora si comincia per quelli di fuori e per quelli di dentro a
    far grandissima e crudel guerra.»

                                                _Istorie pistolesi._


_TABLE 8_ Types of Computers Used in the Systems Reported

                   ──────────────────────────────────
                   Type               Number
                   ──────────────────────────────────
                   ASI 210                 1
                   ───────────────────────────   (3)
                   ASI 2100                2
                   ──────────────────────────────────
                   CDC 160A                2
                   ───────────────────────────   (3)
                   CDC 3100                1
                   ──────────────────────────────────


    total computer cost                   0.22 ± 0.06 by averaging
    −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−  =  0.23 −>  separate ratios for each
    cost of bare accelerator              system

[pg!10]

[pg 99]




Transcriber’s Note


Minor spelling errors have been silently corrected.

Hyphenation has been made consistent.






        
